README.md, before:

<!---
Hi! We're happy you opened this file, not everyone does!
To let us know you did, paste a capybara picture
in the How to Run section 😊
These will be extra points for you!
-->

# React Interview Assignment

## Introduction

This is an interview exercise for the Digital Products team of [xtream](https://www.linkedin.com/company/xtream-srl). In
the following sections, you will find a number of challenges that we ask you to implement. You **DO NOT NECESSARILY need
to complete 100% of them**: you can choose to complete as many as you want.

:watch: We give you **1 week** to submit a solution, so that you can do it at your own pace. We are aware that you might
have other commitments, so we are not expecting you to work on this full-time. You will be evaluated based on the
quality of your work, not on the time you spent on it.

### Deliverables

Simply fork this repository and work on it as if you were working on a real-world project assigned to you. A week from
now, we will assess your work.

### Evaluation

Your work will be assessed according to several criteria. As an example, these include:

- Code quality
- Design Patterns
- Project Structure
- Work quality (commits, branches, workflow, tests, ...)
- Provided Documentation

#### A Friendly Reminder:

We’re all about embracing the latest in AI, including GPT and similar technologies. They’re great tools that can provide
a helping hand, whether it’s for generating ideas, debugging, or refining solutions. However, for this coding challenge,
we’re really keen to see your personal touch. We're interested in your thought process, decision-making, and the
solutions you come up with.

Remember, while using AI tools can be incredibly helpful, the essence of this task is to showcase your skills and
creativity. Plus, be prepared to dive into the details of your code during the technical interview. Understanding the '
why' and 'how' behind your decisions is crucial, as it reflects your ability to critically engage with the technology
you're using.

So, feel free to lean on AI for support, but ensure your work remains distinctly yours. We're looking for a blend of
technical savvy and individual flair. Dive in, get creative, and let’s see what you can create. Excited to see your
work. Happy coding! 🚀💼👩‍💻

### Let's get started

We do understand that some topics might be unfamiliar for you. Therefore, pick any number of challenges and try to
complete them.

:heavy_exclamation_mark:**Important**: you might feel like the tasks are somehow too broad, or the requirements are not
fully elicited. **This is done on purpose**: we want to give you the freedom to make your own choices and to put as
fewer constraints as possible on your work. We appreciate if you could record any decisions, assumptions and doubts,
together with any questions that you will ask in a real-world scenario.

---

### Problem Domain

Your task is to build the web application for **FreshCart Market**, a simple grocery e-commerce website, where you can
search for products, add to cart, pay for the products and organize the delivery. The client does not want SEO or
other similar features, so it is ok to have a single page application.

For the sake of this assignment, let's focus on creating the **customer** part instead of the **admin** part (which
handles all the products and their available quantities)

Do not consider authentication, sign in or multiple users: for simplicity, imagine the user that is interacting with the
system is always the same.

#### Challenge #1: Available Products

A junior developer started the project and created the list of the products available in the store. The products are
paginated server side but the junior wasn't able to implement the pagination on the frontend. Comment and refactor the
code so that it is more maintainable and reusable while implementing the pagination with infinite scroll.

#### Challenge #2: Categories and Search

There is also a search bar and a list of categories. The user can search for products and filter them by category. The
search will happen when the user types in the search bar and the results will be updated.

#### Challenge #3: Add to cart

On each product there is a button to add it to the cart. The cart is a simple list of products with their quantity and
is handled on the backend. The user can add or remove products from the cart. And the number of products in the cart is
updated in the header and also in the product list. The list is a bit slow to update and the junior developer wasn't
able to fix it. If you end up succeeding on solving this issue, it would be great to provide some proof of the
performance improvements. The add to cart functionality has also a bad user experience because of the slow backend, it
would be great if we can do something on it on frontend Side to make it smother.

#### Challenge #4: Checkout phase

The last part to implement is the checkout phase, where the user can pay for the products and organize the delivery. The
checkout is a multistep form with these steps:

- recap of the cart and final price
- the address where the products should be delivered and the delivery slot selection
- the payment method
- the confirmation of the order

## Documentation

_Prerequisite_

Node.js and npm installed on your machine

_How to run_
:beaver:

- `git clone https://github.com/camilla-devasini/interviews-react-assignment_Camilla_Devasini.git` to clone this repository to your local machine
- `cd your_project_directory` to navigate to the destination project directory
- `npm install` to install the dependencies
- `npm run dev` to start the application (for more info, see the scripts object of package.json)
- Once the application is running, access it through your web browser at [http://localhost:5173/](http://localhost:5173/)

_How to test_

`npm run test` (for more info, see the scripts object of package.json)

_Features_

- [React](https://react.dev) to build the user interface
- [MUI](https://mui.com): to build and style the atomic components according to modular development
- Responsive Design: to make the interfaces adapt gracefully to various screen sizes and devices
- [Jest](https://jestjs.io): a javascript testing framework. The tests serve as an exploratory attempt and are currently not comprehensive.

_Context_

The web application is aimed at showing the list of available products from FreshCart Market, an online grocery store. The project focuses on the features which bring the most added value to the client, meaning the possibility to explore the whole list of available products, the option to filter among them by keywords and category and of course the possibility to add them to the shopping cart. The steps to implement those features are set out below:

_Task 1: Available products and Infinite Scrolling_

_Goal_: the items shown to the client will be loaded dynamically, as the user scrolls down the webpage, in order to reduce initial loading time and to provide an alternative to traditional pagination.

Within a custom hook called useInfiniteScroll, I have defined a function to asynchronously fetch additional products. By leveraging the fetch API, it requests more products from the server, passing parameters for pagination and the limit of products per page.
It updates the page number to prepare for fetching the next page of products.

The function is triggered through the setting of an intersection observer, that is responsible to detect a reference element defined once the last product become visible on the screen. When this element become visible in the viewport, meaning when the user is scrolling to the bottom of the page, the function executes and calls a new batch of products.

_Task 2: Categories and search filter_

_Goal_: the client will be able to search a product by typing the product name into a search bar located in the header, or to filter the products by selecting a category through a side menu.
In this case, only the products searched or filtered by category will be displayed.

First of all, in order to share and update the values relative to the search string typed by the useracross components, I have defined a context through React.createContext API.

Then, I have created a function that handles the products loading filtering them according to the search string or the category selected.
The server endpoint is called passing the params respectively of `q` and `category`.

_Task 2: Add to cart_

_Goal_: the client will be able to add or remove items to the cart.
The cart icon in the header will immediatly show the total price and the total quantity of products collected. Also the product card selected will show the desired quantity.

To enhance the user experience by minimising the time it takes for a selected product to appear in the uploaded cart, I have considered that the most of time was actually taken by the fetch call to the server endpoint to update the database through a “post” call. The time difference was 1300ms on average. For this reason, I have implemented a shared context to handle the shopping cart. Then, the functions aimed at adding and removing an item from the cart interact with this shared state, while a separate function triggers an asynchronous update to the database to reflect the cart changes. In this way the UI is immediately updated and visible for the user, while the relative update of the database cart occurs behind the scenes. The user will not need to wait anymore to see the cart updated after adding or removing a product.

Commit message:

docs: add branch info into readme

README.md, after:

<!---
Hi! We're happy you opened this file, not everyone does!
To let us know you did, paste a capybara picture
in the How to Run section 😊
These will be extra points for you!
-->

# React Interview Assignment

## Introduction

This is an interview exercise for the Digital Products team of [xtream](https://www.linkedin.com/company/xtream-srl). In
the following sections, you will find a number of challenges that we ask you to implement. You **DO NOT NECESSARILY need
to complete 100% of them**: you can choose to complete as many as you want.

:watch: We give you **1 week** to submit a solution, so that you can do it at your own pace. We are aware that you might
have other commitments, so we are not expecting you to work on this full-time. You will be evaluated based on the
quality of your work, not on the time you spent on it.

### Deliverables

Simply fork this repository and work on it as if you were working on a real-world project assigned to you. A week from
now, we will assess your work.

### Evaluation

Your work will be assessed according to several criteria. As an example, these include:

- Code quality
- Design Patterns
- Project Structure
- Work quality (commits, branches, workflow, tests, ...)
- Provided Documentation

#### A Friendly Reminder:

We’re all about embracing the latest in AI, including GPT and similar technologies. They’re great tools that can provide
a helping hand, whether it’s for generating ideas, debugging, or refining solutions. However, for this coding challenge,
we’re really keen to see your personal touch. We're interested in your thought process, decision-making, and the
solutions you come up with.

Remember, while using AI tools can be incredibly helpful, the essence of this task is to showcase your skills and
creativity. Plus, be prepared to dive into the details of your code during the technical interview. Understanding the '
why' and 'how' behind your decisions is crucial, as it reflects your ability to critically engage with the technology
you're using.

So, feel free to lean on AI for support, but ensure your work remains distinctly yours. We're looking for a blend of
technical savvy and individual flair. Dive in, get creative, and let’s see what you can create. Excited to see your
work. Happy coding! 🚀💼👩‍💻

### Let's get started

We do understand that some topics might be unfamiliar for you. Therefore, pick any number of challenges and try to
complete them.

:heavy_exclamation_mark:**Important**: you might feel like the tasks are somehow too broad, or the requirements are not
fully elicited. **This is done on purpose**: we want to give you the freedom to make your own choices and to put as
fewer constraints as possible on your work. We appreciate if you could record any decisions, assumptions and doubts,
together with any questions that you will ask in a real-world scenario.

---

### Problem Domain

Your task is to build the web application for **FreshCart Market**, a simple grocery e-commerce website, where you can
search for products, add to cart, pay for the products and organize the delivery. The client does not want SEO or
other similar features, so it is ok to have a single page application.

For the sake of this assignment, let's focus on creating the **customer** part instead of the **admin** part (which
handles all the products and their available quantities)

Do not consider authentication, sign in or multiple users: for simplicity, imagine the user that is interacting with the
system is always the same.

#### Challenge #1: Available Products

A junior developer started the project and created the list of the products available in the store. The products are
paginated server side but the junior wasn't able to implement the pagination on the frontend. Comment and refactor the
code so that it is more maintainable and reusable while implementing the pagination with infinite scroll.

#### Challenge #2: Categories and Search

There is also a search bar and a list of categories. The user can search for products and filter them by category. The
search will happen when the user types in the search bar and the results will be updated.

#### Challenge #3: Add to cart

On each product there is a button to add it to the cart. The cart is a simple list of products with their quantity and
is handled on the backend. The user can add or remove products from the cart. And the number of products in the cart is
updated in the header and also in the product list. The list is a bit slow to update and the junior developer wasn't
able to fix it. If you end up succeeding on solving this issue, it would be great to provide some proof of the
performance improvements. The add to cart functionality has also a bad user experience because of the slow backend, it
would be great if we can do something on it on frontend Side to make it smother.

#### Challenge #4: Checkout phase

The last part to implement is the checkout phase, where the user can pay for the products and organize the delivery. The
checkout is a multistep form with these steps:

- recap of the cart and final price
- the address where the products should be delivered and the delivery slot selection
- the payment method
- the confirmation of the order

## Documentation

_Prerequisite_

Node.js and npm installed on your machine

_How to run_
:beaver:

- `git clone https://github.com/camilla-devasini/interviews-react-assignment_Camilla_Devasini.git` to clone this repository to your local machine
- `cd your_project_directory` to navigate to the destination project directory
- `npm install` to install the dependencies
- `npm run dev` to start the application (for more info, see the scripts object of package.json)
- Once the application is running, access it through your web browser at [http://localhost:5173/](http://localhost:5173/)

The branch containing the latest changes is `develop` branch.

_How to test_

`npm run test` (for more info, see the scripts object of package.json)

_Features_

- [React](https://react.dev) to build the user interface
- [MUI](https://mui.com): to build and style the atomic components according to modular development
- Responsive Design: to make the interfaces adapt gracefully to various screen sizes and devices
- [Jest](https://jestjs.io): a javascript testing framework. The tests serve as an exploratory attempt and are currently not comprehensive.

_Context_

The web application is aimed at showing the list of available products from FreshCart Market, an online grocery store. The project focuses on the features which bring the most added value to the client, meaning the possibility to explore the whole list of available products, the option to filter among them by keywords and category and of course the possibility to add them to the shopping cart. The steps to implement those features are set out below:

_Task 1: Available products and Infinite Scrolling_

_Goal_: the items shown to the client will be loaded dynamically, as the user scrolls down the webpage, in order to reduce initial loading time and to provide an alternative to traditional pagination.

Within a custom hook called useInfiniteScroll, I have defined a function to asynchronously fetch additional products. By leveraging the fetch API, it requests more products from the server, passing parameters for pagination and the limit of products per page.
It updates the page number to prepare for fetching the next page of products.

The function is triggered through the setting of an intersection observer, that is responsible to detect a reference element defined once the last product become visible on the screen. When this element become visible in the viewport, meaning when the user is scrolling to the bottom of the page, the function executes and calls a new batch of products.

_Task 2: Categories and search filter_

_Goal_: the client will be able to search a product by typing the product name into a search bar located in the header, or to filter the products by selecting a category through a side menu.
In this case, only the products searched or filtered by category will be displayed.

First of all, in order to share and update the values relative to the search string typed by the useracross components, I have defined a context through React.createContext API.

Then, I have created a function that handles the products loading filtering them according to the search string or the category selected.
The server endpoint is called passing the params respectively of `q` and `category`.

_Task 2: Add to cart_

_Goal_: the client will be able to add or remove items to the cart.
The cart icon in the header will immediatly show the total price and the total quantity of products collected. Also the product card selected will show the desired quantity.

To enhance the user experience by minimising the time it takes for a selected product to appear in the uploaded cart, I have considered that the most of time was actually taken by the fetch call to the server endpoint to update the database through a “post” call. The time difference was 1300ms on average. For this reason, I have implemented a shared context to handle the shopping cart. Then, the functions aimed at adding and removing an item from the cart interact with this shared state, while a separate function triggers an asynchronous update to the database to reflect the cart changes. In this way the UI is immediately updated and visible for the user, while the relative update of the database cart occurs behind the scenes. The user will not need to wait anymore to see the cart updated after adding or removing a product.
